public/content/posts/books.md, before:

---
title: "Books"
date: 2023-09-08
draft: false
---

How to become a great software developer? While a Computer Science degree can help, it's not the answer though. I won't pretend I have it either, I do however tend to give out the same list of books whenever the subject comes up. 

I would suggest starting at the top, but start wherever you like. It's better to read anything then never start right? If you get tired of reading I added some related talks.
 
-----

1. The Programmer's Brain  
    by _Felienne Hermans_

2. The Pragmatic Programmer  
    by _David Thomas_ and _Andrew Hunt_

3. Refactoring  
    by _Martin Fowler_  
    Related talks:  
    - [Refactoring is Not Just Clickbait](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NMPeAW2RWdc)  
        by _Kevlin Henney_

4. Test-Driven Development by Example  
    by _Kent Beck_

5. Clean Architecture A Craftsman's Guide to Software Structure and Design  
    by _Robert C. Martin_  
    The Appendix is a great read, might be a good place to begin if you find the start a bit too technical.

# Fantasy
It's important to have fun :)
- Assassin's Apprentice  
    by _Robin Hobb_

Commit message:

add great conversation between Casey and Robert on clean code

public/content/posts/books.md, after:

---
title: "Books"
date: 2023-09-08
draft: false
---

How to become a great software developer? While a Computer Science degree can help, it's not the answer though. I won't pretend I have it either, I do however tend to give out the same list of books whenever the subject comes up. 

I would suggest starting at the top, but start wherever you like. It's better to read anything then never start right? If you get tired of reading I added some related talks.
 
-----

1. The Programmer's Brain  
    by _Felienne Hermans_

2. The Pragmatic Programmer  
    by _David Thomas_ and _Andrew Hunt_

3. Refactoring  
    by _Martin Fowler_  
    Related talks:  
    - [Refactoring is Not Just Clickbait](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NMPeAW2RWdc)  
        by _Kevlin Henney_

4. Test-Driven Development by Example  
    by _Kent Beck_

5. Clean Architecture A Craftsman's Guide to Software Structure and Design  
    by _Robert C. Martin_  
    The Appendix is a great read, might be a good place to begin if you find the start a bit too technical.
    Alternatively you could read Clean Code, however most of its advise is
    already discussed in _The Pragmatic Programmer_ and _Refactoring_.
    [This conversation](https://github.com/cmuratori/misc/blob/main/cleancodeqa.md) between Robert and Casey in response to [Casey's critisim on Clean Code](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tD5NrevFtbU) is a great addition or summary of some of the points.

# Fantasy
It's important to have fun :)
- Assassin's Apprentice  
    by _Robin Hobb_
